---
title: Painful Upgrade to MathJax 3
layout: post
use_toc: true
use_code: true
last_updated: 2020-11-29
excerpt: The upgrade experience to MathJax 3 was far from smooth.
---

*Update (2020-11-29)*: Added information for kramdown v2.2 and GitHub Pages v207.


## Writing Math in Markdown

### Jekyll kramdown

Jekyll uses the [kramdown](https://kramdown.gettalong.org/) converter to compile Markdown into HTML. As part of the conversion process, kramdown looks for ["math blocks"](https://kramdown.gettalong.org/syntax.html#math-blocks) that start and end with `$$`. The double-dollar-sign is the only math block delimiter that kramdown supports. A math block that is both preceded and follwed by a newline is considered "display math." Any non-display math block is called "inline math."

There is one caveat: `$$`-enclosed text that appears between an explicit pair of opening and closing HTML tags in the Markdown file might need special treatment. See the [kramdown documentation](https://kramdown.gettalong.org/syntax.html#html-blocks) on `markdown="span"` and `markdown="block"` attributes.

The [`math_engine` option](https://kramdown.gettalong.org/options.html) in Jekyll's `_config.yml` determines what kramdown does with each math block. The following table shows how kramdown converts math blocks in Markdown into HTML with the default `math_engine: mathjax` option.

Type         | Markdown syntax               | HTML output (v2.2+) | HTML output (v1 - v2.1)
-------------|-------------------------------|---------------------|-----------------------------------------------------
display math | `[newline] $$...$$ [newline]` | `\[...\]`           | `<script type="math/tex; mode=display">...</script>`
inline math  | `[text] $$...$$ [text]`       | `\(...\)`           | `<script type="math/tex">...</script>`

The HTML output `<script>` tags used by kramdown v1 through v2.1 are appropriate for MathJax 2.7, which renders them into math notation. However, MathJax 3 no longer uses the `<script>` tags. This is explained in more detail below.

Another important note is that kramdown treats the `\` character as an escape character. In order to have `\(` or `\[` appear in the generated HTML output, the Markdown file must have `\\(` or `\\[`.


### MathJax

MathJax is a JavaScript library that parses HTML documents, identifies math expressions, and renders them in proper math notation. In both versions 2.7 and 3, MathJax looks for certain math delimiters:

> The default math delimiters are `$$...$$` and `\[...\]` for displayed mathematics, and `\(...\)` for in-line mathematics. Note in particular that the `$...$` in-line delimiters are **not** used by default.

*See MathJax [2.7](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/v2.7-latest/start.html#tex-and-latex-input) and [3](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/v3.0-latest/basic/mathematics.html#tex-and-latex-input) documentation*

Note that these delimiters are customizable. See MathJax [2.7](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/v2.7-latest/tex.html#tex-and-latex-math-delimiters) and [3](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/v3.0-latest/input/tex/delimiters.html).

In version 2.7, MathJax ran a [preprocessor](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/v2.7-latest/advanced/model.html) on HTML files that converted math delimiters into `<script>` tags, similar to the process described for kramdown above. Then, a MathJax "input jax" would translate each `<script>` tag into the internal MathJax format which is then rendered by an "output jax" based on the output format chosen by the user (e.g., HTML-CSS, SVG, or NativeMML).

However, MathJax 3 changes the paradigm by skipping `<script>` tags altogether. Instead, it directly parses math delimiters in HTML documents and renders math expressions. As a result, MathJax 3 by default no longer accepts the `<script>` tags that kramdown (before v2.2) outputs using `math_engine: mathjax` option. As a [workaround](https://docs.mathjax.org/en/latest/upgrading/v2.html#changes-in-the-mathjax-api), MathJax 3 can also be extended to work with HTML documents that already have `<script>` tags by adding an action to its `renderActions` option. The first element in the list corresponding to the `findScript` key is a number indicating the priority that the action runs. For reference, MathJax 3's standard parsing is done using the `find` action with a priority of 10.

```javascript
window.MathJax = {
  options: {
    renderActions: {
      findScript: [9, function (doc) {
        for (const node of document.querySelectorAll('script[type^="math/tex"]')) {
          const display = !!node.type.match(/; *mode=display/);
          const math = new doc.options.MathItem(node.textContent, doc.inputJax[0], display);
          const text = document.createTextNode('');
          node.parentNode.replaceChild(text, node);
          math.start = {node: text, delim: '', n: 0};
          math.end = {node: text, delim: '', n: 0};
          doc.math.push(math);
        }
        doc.findMath();
      }, '']
    }
  }
};
```

Other sources
- [MathJax 3 in Jekyll and Kramdown](https://11011110.github.io/blog/2019/10/17/mathjax-3-jekyll.html): describes the kramdown-MathJax 3 integration problem and proposes a different JavaScript solution to deal with the `<script>` tags that kramdown generates.


### GitHub Pages

GitHub Pages currently always sets `math_engine: mathjax` in `_config.yml`, overriding any user-specified value ([GitHub Help](https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-github-pages-and-jekyll)). This is a GitHub Pages limitation, and not a Jekyll limitation. However, there is a [possibility](https://github.com/github/pages-gem/pull/740) that GitHub removes its `math_engine: mathjax` requirement.

GitHub Pages also sporadically updates the version of kramdown that it uses. As of August 2020, GitHub Pages [v207](https://github.com/github/pages-gem/releases/tag/v207) now uses kramdown version 2.3+.

## Setup

I have described how kramdown, MathJax, and GitHub Pages work individually. Now I describe what it means when these moving pieces all come together.

### November 2020 onwards

Because I am using GitHub Pages to automatically generate my static site, I am stuck with Jekyll's `math_engine: mathjax` option in `_config.yml`. Since GitHub Pages now uses kramdown v2.3, math blocks `$$` in Markdown are converted to either inline `\(...\)` or display `\[...\]` markers. This means that I can directly use Mathjax 3 without resulting to the `findScript` workaround.

I could have tried to avoid kramdown's math blocks altogether by switching to single-dollar-sign `$` delimiters for inline math and using `\[...\]` delimiters for display math. However, this strategy does not always work because kramdown does not know to treat the math expression as a math block and may instead interpret LaTeX underscores as italics. (This is also why setting `markdown: GFM` in `_config.yml` is a bad idea, because GFM does not know to parse math separately from normal Markdown.)

Thus, my current setup is as follows:

**Setup**
- Set `use_math: true` in the preamble of the page. Write `$` for an actual dollar-sign in the page; no need for any escaping.

**Inline Math**: `[text] $$...$$ [text]` (note the double dollar signs)
- converted by kramdown into `[text] \(...\) [text]` in the HTML
- MathJax 3 directly parses and renders the HTML as inline math

**Display Math**: `[newline] $$...$$ [newline]`
- converted by kramdown into `[newline] \[...\] [newline]` in the HTML
- MathJax 3 directly parses and renders the HTML as display math

**Wishful / possible future directions**
- If kramdown supports custom math delimiters for either the `math_engine: mathjax` or `math_engine: null` options, then I could directly use `\[...\]` and `\(...\)` delimiters.
- If GFM adds support for math blocks, then I could bypass kramdown altogether and specify `markdown: GFM` in `_config.yml`.
- Now that kramdown v2.2+ directly outputs LaTeX into the HTML, I may consider using [KaTeX](https://katex.org) instead of MathJax.


### pre-November 2020

Because I am choosing to upgrade to MathJax 3 and I am using GitHub Pages to automatically generate my static site, I am stuck with Jekyll's `math_engine: mathjax` option in `_config.yml`. Therefore, math blocks `$$` in Markdown are converted to `<script>` tags, which I parse with MathJax by adding in the `findScript` action to its set of `renderActions`.

I could have tried to avoid kramdown's math blocks altogether by switching to single-dollar-sign `$` delimiters for inline math and using `\[...\]` delimiters for display math. However, this strategy does not always work because kramdown does not know to treat the math expression as a math block and may instead interpret LaTeX underscores as italics. Furthermore, I am also holding out for the [possibility](https://github.com/github/pages-gem/pull/644) that GitHub removes its `math_engine: mathjax` requirement.

Thus, my current setup is as follows:

**Setup**
- Set `use_math: true` in the preamble of the page. To write an actual dollar-sign in the page, escape it as `\$`. Such escaping is only necessary when `use_math: true` is set in the preamble.

**Inline Math**
- _legacy (but current) option_: `[text] $$...$$ [text]` (note the double dollar signs)
    - converted by `kramdown` into `[text] <script type="math/tex">...</script> [text]`
    - MathJax 3 uses the `findScript` action in `renderActions` of the MathJax configuration to identify these script tags
- _future (hopefully)_: `[text] $...$ [text]` or `[text] \\(...\\) [text]` (double-backslash is necessary because `kramdown` treats `\` as an escape character)
    - not converted by `kramdown` during `jekyll` Markdown-to-HTML compilation
    - rendered directly from LaTeX by MathJax 3 (after enabling `$` inline delimiter)

**Display Math**: `[newline] $$...$$ [newline]`
- _legacy (but current) option_
    - converted by `kramdown` into `<script type="math/tex; mode=display">...</script>`
    - MathJax 3 uses the `findScript` action in `renderActions` of the MathJax configuration to identify these script tags
- _future (hopefully)_
    - not converted by `kramdown` during `jekyll` Markdown-to-HTML compilation
    - rendered directly from LaTeX by MathJax 3

**Known issue**: Because the `findScript` action is called separately from `find`, different math expressions are parsed at different times. Suppose the `findScript` action is called before `find`, as illustrated in the example above. As a result, if there are new commands or operators (*e.g.*, `\newcommand{\bx}{\mathbf{x}}`) that are used by a math expression parsed by `findScript` but defined within an expression parsed by `find`, then the expression will fail to display properly.
